mephistopheles credo is that being is so
permeated by suffering and catastrophe
and tragedy and betrayal that it would
be better if it was just brought to a
halt
and you know in some sense we're pulled
in the world between those two polls
right because part of us would like to
build something better and to bring
what's greater and more magnificent into
being and another part of us is bitter
and resentful about the tragedy and
catastrophe of existence and so what
mephistopheles doesn't understand is
that you cannot have
a thing without its opposite and so
there's this left hemisphere fantasy
that we can create a world in which all
is simply peace and joy
i don't believe that this is a
possibility blake actually also said
that in heaven there must be some degree
of suffering otherwise it couldn't be
joy
[Music]
hello everyone i'm extremely pleased
today to be speaking once again with dr
ian mcgillcrist i've spoken with dr
mcgill chris a number of times uh the
first time very intense half an hour
conversation which was about 150th as
long as i wanted it to be which was very
well received
ian and i have a lot of interests
that overlap
i would say particularly in what you
might describe the neuropsychology of
philosophy because we're both we both
operate to some degree at the nexus
between
biological psychiatry and neurology and
and philosophy especially philosophy
that's associated um with narrative and
so it's very interesting to talk to ian
he's come to similar and different
conclusions than i
from a from a similar and different
pathway and so it's a lovely interplay
between things we're both familiar with
and things were not i'll tell you a bit
about ian and then we'll jump into his
new book uh
which is a
masterpiece a very
long ubra
concentrating on this vital interplay
between the scientific and the
philosophical dr miguel christ is a
former fellow of all souls college
oxford an associate
fellow of green templeton college oxford
a fellow of the royal college of
psychiatrists and of the royal society
of arts a consultant emeritus of the
bethlehem and mausley hospital in london
a former research fellow in neuroimaging
at johns hopkins university medical
school baltimore one of the great
world's great research institutions and
a former fellow of the institute of
advanced studies in stellenbosch he now
lives on the isle of skye off the coast
of northwest scotland where he continues
to write
and lectures worldwide
ian is committed to the idea
that the mind and the brain
can be understood only by seeing them in
the broadest possible context that of
the whole of our physical and spiritual
existence and of the wider human culture
in which they arise
the culture which helps to mold and is
in turn molded by our minds and brain
he is perhaps
most well known publicly for his
best-selling book the master and his
emissary 2009 published by yale
university press which is sold
approaching 200 000 copies worldwide
which is a uh what would you call
all bases loaded home run for an
academic book and it brought him to very
wide public attention so ian it's a
great see you again i'm so glad we have
a chance to talk shall we dive right
into your
to the structure and the origin of your
new book
let's do that it's great to be talking
with you again jordan thanks yes i i
would like to be able to talk to you a
bit about my new book
uh the matter with things which i think
you have had a chance to look at but
it's quite long and i know you're a very
busy man so it will be
good for both of us to be able to just
take a tour around it a bit
um
it follows on from the book that you
mentioned the master and his emissary
but it takes the philosophical
implications of the fact that our brains
are divided and that each half of the
brain produces a different version of
the experiential world it takes that
much further
and it takes it in particular in
relation to something that i know
concerns both of us and i imagine
concerns many viewers and listeners
which is
the devastatingly reduced
vision of the world that we now have
this reductive materialist ideology
which is absolutely not
uh compelled on us as people seem to
think by science or by reason
uh
it's a it's a version of the world which
is very much constant with the view that
one of the hemispheres of our brain
takes the left hemisphere
and we shouldn't be paying too much
attention to what it has to say except
for the business of getting our daily
bread but actually in terms of
understanding the world it's the right
hemisphere that helps us here and in
what you said in your introduction
you suggested that i think context is
very very important in fact context is
everything context can completely change
the meaning
of any situation of any words or
or anything that we're trying to put
across
and the right hemisphere is able to take
in this broader context perhaps i'll
just say something very brief about that
from an evolutionary point of view we
know that all the brains we've looked at
going way back in into prehistory
all seem to have this divided structure
and indeed the oldest neural network
that of a c anomaly called
nematostelovic tenses 700 million years
old is already asymmetrical which is a
fascinating fact
why would it be asymmetrical the world
isn't asymmetrical in that way
and it seems that this is because all
brains have to do two
things at once each of which could take
up the whole attention of the brain
that is basically to focus on a detail
so that you can grab it and at the same
time not yourself become prey to someone
else who wants to grab you so there's
two kinds of attention that we all need
to be able to pay
how we get food
i i give the enemy sometimes of a bird
picking up a seed on the background of
grits or gravel and being able to get it
swiftly accurately and before anybody
else
but if it's only paying that kind of
attention it will soon become somebody
else's lunch while it's getting its own
because it needs to be looking out for
everything else that's going on for
predators for con specifics for its kin
for those that it's looking after and so
on and it effectively this is something
that is cons constant throughout the
history of evolution but has been taken
a step further in the human brain
because we are very good at standing
back from the world our frontal lobes
are highly developed and they enable us
as you know to stand back from the world
and to be able to see things in a more
dispassionate way and to see them with
more like a bird's eye view
but
that
has meant that we need to be able to
devote a lot of time to theorizing to
mapping the world to exploring the
possible what would happen if we did
this what would happen if we did that
and
one crude and simple way of putting it
is that the right hemispheres are anchor
and reality it's actually looking at
what we're experiencing right now and
enabling us to understand it in all its
complexity whereas the left hemisphere
is giving us just a theoretical
uh take on a certain kind of a situation
so is it reasonable to is it reasonable
to assume so a bunch of thoughts have
been going through my mind and yeah part
of this is
the you need a brain if you start to
move and if you start to move and
interact with the world then you have
the problem of the part versus the whole
that's it and you talked about the bird
that has to distinguish something very
specific a seed against a background
let's say of pebbles but the same bird
having to
be concerned about the broader context
for the presence of predators for
example and so the problem is is while
you're focused on something specific
the rest of the world is still there
yeah and also that the separation
between the part and the rest of the
world is in some in some manner
uh
what would you say it's artificial and
arbitrary yeah because if you're trying
to eat and then you get eaten that
pretty much does in the utility of
eating effectively there aren't parts
parts are an artifact of a certain way
of attending to the world
there are only holes and things that we
think of as parts are holes at another
level and things that we think of the
holes can be seen as parts of an even
bigger hole but this business of carving
things up into parts is a an artifact of
the left hemisphere's piecemeal
attention so because it's trying to
focus on this small detail it's it's
it's homing in on on a certain little
tiny bit perhaps three out of the 360
degrees arc of attention right and and
that leads to
a different take on the world from that
of the right hemisphere and if i can
just put this in a couple of simple
sentences
the left hemisphere sees a word which is
made up of fragments of tiny pieces that
are familiar because they're what it
wants it knows it's targeting them
they are
at a missing and separate from the other
parts they're static because it freezes
it uh freezes its target even if it's
actually
following a moving target like
an eagle trying to catch a rabbit it's
as it were trying to fix that rabbit in
the frame
and so it's this world is one that this
left hemisphere's version of the world
is one made up of bits that are separate
distinct fixed certain
decontextualized abstract because
they've been categorized oh it's one of
those no i know yeah yeah yeah yeah
right it's yeah yeah yeah and and this
act effectively is an inanimate
mechanistic
vision of the world meanwhile the right
so let me ask you let me ask you okay
i'll let you return to that sec let me
ask you about that so i'm thinking as a
way to help people understand this do
you think that that's akin to the
difference between
listening to
music let's say a piece of music and
only hearing
it note by note and listening to a piece
of music and hearing it at the level of
all of the phrases let's say and the
sequences and the totality at the same
time because those are obviously very
different things you could say that and
indeed i i sometimes say that the two
kinds of understanding given by the
hemispheres need to be combined
um it's not that something's wrong with
the left hemisphere's understanding it's
just that it's so very powerful so very
simple compared with what it's actually
um what is going on that if we start
believing
the the map instead of the world that's
mapped then we misunderstand and i think
that's one of the things that we're
doing in in in our society now but i
think i need anyway before we go on to
be able to say something about the
contrasting vision of the right
hemisphere
so
instead of this vision of
stasis particulate
atomistic elements that have to be put
together in order to find any meaning or
direction in them the right hemisphere
is seeing something which is coherent
in which nothing is ever completely
separate from everything else in which
is constantly moving flaming and
changing in which it's embodied and that
embodiment like the rest of its context
makes it what it is when you take it out
of that context it's something else
completely the right hemisphere
understands the implicit all the things
that are not being said the bits between
the
perceptions like make the thing rich and
make it live and in fact this world that
it um
that it creates for us is a rich
embodied implicit living
world and in fact you can experimentally
suppress one hemisphere at a time and
what we find is that when the left
hemisphere is working alone it it does
see things that we would normally see as
living as mechanisms as zombies as
inanimate whereas the whereas the right
hemisphere working alone we'll see
things that normally we would think of
as inanimate as animal so we'll see the
sun for example as as living because
it's it's it's a life force that's
moving across the heavens
so this is a i mean this is all very
simple and
uh for the sake of the argument and for
the sake of our discussion i've
compressed an enormous amount but i
expand this as you know
into a section of about 450 pages in the
new book looking at these hemisphere
differences
so one of the things i noticed and maybe
this will help people get a flavor for
this too is i worked with uh
with anorexic clients for a good while
and one of the things i noticed about
the anorexics because they already have
a problem of perception not just
conception absolutely it's a body image
problem but
if you work with someone who's anorexic
what you soon learn is that they cannot
see their body as a whole no what
they're doing is obsessively they're
very orderly people and they fixate on
parts and so they'll take a look at
their calf say and maybe there's some
residual calf muscle and they'll look at
the muscle really independently of the
rest of the leg and they'll try to
figure out if there's any fat there on
the muscle and the problem with that is
that when you parse your perception of
your body up too focally
you can't actually distinguish between
what's
acceptable in terms of let's say obesity
and fat layer and what isn't
you have to solve that problem by
glancing at yourself comprehensively say
as a gestalt in a mirror so you see your
whole body and then you also have to be
able to do that
while you're simultaneously remembering
how other people look and
contextualizing yourself that way and
it's so
the the anorexic is so focused on the
part that they can no longer see the
hole and then and then they can't even
see their body properly and um why this
is so important to me
is that
the right hemisphere sees the body as a
whole but the left hemisphere only
recognizes parts
uh it doesn't contain the full body
image that is in the right hemisphere
and there's several lines of
of evidence that suggests that anorexia
nervosa is in fact a right hemisphere
deficit condition it has many of the
elements of autism about it which also
simulates a right hemisphere deficit
condition in some cases i mean i would
say that there are autisms rather than
one single autism
uh and but that would take us perhaps
too far away from where we are at the
moment so so that means the body
dysmorphias are at least in part a
substitution of the
map for the territory and i wanted to
talk a bit about that left hemisphere
issue idea too you know so
imagine when you when you detect
something as a part and you've defined
it as a part you've also in some sense
like i'm looking at a little black box
in front of me right now and i can see
it as a single pixel entity in some
sense so it's a black box so black is a
very low resolution idea and box is a
very low resolution idea and if i really
look at the box i can see all the subtle
variations of color because it's not
just pure black and there's all sorts of
shades of gray and i can see all the
things that distinguish it from other
boxes but when i say box and i see black
box what i've done is i've i i've
compressed the world into a
concept which would be a map let's say
and then you can see that we do that so
much now because we communicate so much
and our part detection has become so uh
powerful our ability to focus in on
details
technologically amplified by our ability
to exchange linguistic ideas and the
power of our science and so you think
maybe that as we've progressed over the
last several thousand years that intense
social communication that's allowed us
to parse up the world into finer and
finer and more detailed bits has also
suppressed our relationship with the
right
yes i think it has but
it's um
it would perhaps
make a lot of sense if i were able to
unpack the structure of my new book a
bit because it will answer some of the
points that you're making
so in that first the books divided into
three parts
and in that first part i am
focusing almost exclusively on
neuropsychology and the philosophical
implications of it
and what i'm showing is that in all the
what i call portals whereby we can gain
information about the world
the left hemisphere is inferior to the
right so it's not just attention i've
been focusing on attention because i
think it's extraordinarily important
um
attention helps us construct the world
that we we live in how we attend changes
what we find in the world and also
changes us so it's pretty important
stuff
um but i i'm looking at the attention
uh perception which is not the same of
course as attention
um judgment which is the kind of
conclusions we draw from the basis of
what we attend to and perceive
our emotional and social intelligence
our cognitive intelligence good
old-fashioned iq
and creativity and in all these respects
the left hemisphere is inferior to the
right and it's interesting that
i look at a lot of what must be to
somebody not familiar with them really
extraordinary syndromes that are
familiar to people like you and me
uh in
the world of neuropsychology
neuropsychiatry and the ones that are
characterized by the grossest
delusions and hallucinations are almost
exclusively due to damage to the right
hemisphere not to damage to the left
so it is
it is that is a
kind of important place to start because
if we're going to talk about what is the
world really like what do we really like
and you've got two versions in the past
philosophers have said well some people
see it like this some people see it like
that
and then they shut their shoulders and
go you know but these are just two
different ways of looking we can now i
think for the first time and this is
exciting
go further forward and say this has all
the hallmarks the characteristics of the
misperceptions the misconceptions of the
left hemisphere and this on the other
hand has the hallmarks the stamp of
coming from the right hemisphere which
is more vertical
and so
that's one reason that that i need to
spend some time on that particular
aspect um
in the beginning of the book because
as we go on and as it were if you like
pan back a bit from those
portals whereby we get information about
the world to the powers that we might
uh go down when we're trying to
understand the world like science reason
intuition and imagination
we need first of all to have established
something about the degree to which each
of the hemispheres can be taken to be
vertical
we'll have more with dr mcgill chris in
just a moment but first i want to tell
you about birch gold the consumer price
index has reached yet another 40-year
high and the latest gdp numbers confirm
that the united states is in a recession
now is not the time to have all your
money in the stock market or tied to the
u.s dollar protect your savings from a
highly turbulent economy by diversifying
at least some of your investment
portfolio into gold and silver from
birch gold group text jordan to 989898
and birch gold will send you a free
information kit on how to transition an
ira or eligible 401k into an ira in
precious metals birch gold will even
help you hold gold in a tax sheltered
account for decades investors have
relied on gold and silver as a hedge
against inflation now you can too with
an a plus rating from the better
business bureau countless five-star
reviews and thousands of satisfied
customers secure your future with gold
from birch gold now text jordan to
989898 and get real help from birch gold
today again text jordan to 989898 to
claim your free no obligation
information kit on how to protect your
hard earned savings with gold
[Music]
when i wrote maps of meaning my first
book i structured it in some ways
similarly because the first
large chapter is this chapter on
neuropsychology and hemispheric function
and i felt as you feel that it was
necessary to make the case that there
are these two fundamental differences in
perceiving the world before
investigating that both phil like
philosophically and i would say
at the narrative level and also
conceptually now you let's talk about
the last two parts of the book the
second two sections and then maybe you
could also describe a bit if you would
why you think the right hemisphere
and its concentration on narrative per
se and narrative understanding is
relevant to this venture so we have the
right and the left and they look at
things differently the right is
contextual you spend the first third of
the book talking about hemispheric
differences and making case that first
of all those are
deep and old and
profoundly important and philosophically
significant the next part of the book
deals with
yes deals with the ways in which
we use the information that has come to
us through those various portals those
faculties that i've
described
and they are effectively
science reason intuition and imagination
um science and reason i don't think many
people would quarrel with
um because there has been a motivated
attack on intuition and imagination in
recent years i think that people do
there are some people who might question
the value of those and i think that's
kind of
those are those left hemisphere types
that you're talking about
well of course yeah i mean you and i
know that people are not so simple that
they can simply be summed up in that way
but it is quite true that a certain way
of looking at the world that of the left
has a kind of um
cohesion of its own and the
way of looking at the world the right
hemisphere has two and yet they're not
quite compatible so in a world like ours
in which there's a lot of public debate
and public discussion
as the way in which we come to our
understanding of the world
this explicit difference between these
two becomes more important if you i mean
let me just explain what i mean there if
if you look back
most people until the last couple of
hundred years
have
developed an understanding of the world
through
a consistent coherent culture
often
partly a religious tradition
through living close to nature
through
narratives myths
uh as you mentioned
um through drama through poetry and so
on and only part of the way in which
they think about the world will be due
to public debate and until the the
advent of modern media probably very
little of anybody's world was made up by
public debate but in the world where we
are in
one of the worst things that can happen
is people say you're inconsistent they
feel like if you're inconsistent that
shows you must be wrong but it might
show that actually what you're trying to
do
is to balance two things that in
slightly different ways in different
circumstances are equally important but
appear to our rather simple-minded way
of looking at the world like
contradictions you know in the in the
last part of the book i have a whole
chapter on the coincidence of opposites
okay so one of the things i found very
interesting about the psychoanalytic
tradition and also some of the
neurological work on dreams
in relationship to this issue of
hemispheric specialization was the idea
that dreams which would be in the domain
of imagination intuition are willing to
sacrifice consistency for inclusion and
so you can see these contradictory um
perceptual and conceptual elements being
brought together in a dream because the
what the dream this is a union idea from
the idea derived from carl jung that the
dream
extends the narrow range of what we
might describe as left hemisphere
consistency
into a broader domain where that
consistent theory is not comprehensive
enough to account for everything and
because it's consistent but not
comprehensive
it's going to produce paradoxes and then
in order to
increase the degree to which it's
comprehensive you have to introduce what
looked like paradoxes within the system
and from within the system that looks
like a categorical or a logical error
but from the broader context it's
actually a movement to a more
uh inclusive
and comprehensive way of perceiving the
world and dreams do that and it's one of
the things i loved about the union
notion was that
we have this delimited domain of
explicit propositional knowledge but
partly because of the requirements for
consistency
and and our finite nature it can't be
comprehensive and so we need something
to fill the gap between the consistent
and narrow and the ultimately unknown
and that is in fact the realm of dream
and imagination yeah yeah no that's
right
and there are virtues to
the dream world if necessary but
certainly to intuition
that are not open to pure reason which
is not in any sense to devalue or
disparage reason it's in fact i worry
that in our age
reason is being sacrificed that we're
becoming completely unreasonable
there are two kinds of ways of thinking
about reason
one is a a kind of logical formulaic
carrying out of procedures and following
of pathways that in a sense could be
programmed into the computer
and the other is a very powerful idea
that has been important in western
history for for hundreds of years which
is the idea of being able to bring
together what we know from logic with
what we understand from experience
from uh intuition from context from our
embodied lives the kind of wisdom that a
good judge would be able to bring to a
case not not just saying well look i've
looked at the rule book and it says in
clause 186 or whatever no i mean that
judge should be a fully functioning
human being and this kind of reason
which is nuanced which is sober
which is um much more uh inclusive and
less combative than the kind of reason
the very sort of skeletal kind of
reasoning that now seems to have um
tossed the other kind of reasoning out
of the nest um that's the kind that
holds sway at the moment so what did i
what well you saw this
go ahead go ahead what what i want to do
in
perhaps i could just explain a little
bit about this part of the book i want
to take each of these things i'm not
going to go through what i say of course
it would take far too long but just to
give people some idea of the structure
so i i
look at science as having peculiar
strengths which are incredibly important
and on which everything that i do and
say
depends but it also can't be taken in
the way that scientism does as being
able to answer all our questions that's
simplistic and misguided
so it's seeing where it has strengths
and where it
really needs to say this is not an area
on which science can really pronounce
and and so i look at the strengths and
the weaknesses and i do the same with
reason you know it has enormous
strengths
but it can also lead us to
certain kinds of abstract ways of
thinking which lead us to false
conclusions
it is interesting that abandoning reason
um is dangerous and can lead to the
wrong conclusions but actually merely
following it in a blind kind of way can
lead to falsehoods as well
there's a there's a patient of um
damasio's called elliot who has lost his
ability to use intuition and emotion so
he has to reason every single thing out
from scratch in this he's rather like
certain kinds of schizophrenic and
autistic subjects which have no
conception of the intuitive and have to
base everything on reasoning from first
principles and of course what it means
is that they're often deluded and their
lives are intolerable
well i had a client who had
obsessive-compulsive disorder a number
of
he was very very intelligent and
obsessive-compulsive disorder shares
some features with anorexia and part of
it is this focus on the part to the
exclusion of the whole and he would ask
me very complicated questions which were
deceptively simple so he said for
example lots of people with ocd they
won't touch something that's
contaminated because then they feel that
they're contaminated and that they
contaminate others and so that's a big
part of the moral quandary that besets
people with ocd because there is some
possibility that if you go out into the
world you'll contact a disease let's say
if you touch something you shouldn't and
then there is some possibility that
you'll bring that back say and transmit
that to your children and the question
of exactly how much precaution you
should take therefore becomes a very
important question especially if you try
to solve it with the use of let's say
a propositional expert system instead of
being able to analyze context and he
said look i don't know when i'm sitting
on a subway at night and there's a
newspaper that someone left behind i
don't know when it's acceptable for me
to pick it up and read it or not
how do you decide that
and i thought
i actually have no idea how i'd decide
that because i was trying to figure out
how to guide him with a set of
principles so it's like well do i touch
it if it's a little damp do i touch it
if it has a footprint on it do i touch
it if it's folded too many times do i
touch it if it's on the floor do i touch
it if it's more than two days old and
the answer is i have no idea how i know
whether or not that newspaper magazine
that's been sitting there and abandoned
by someone is an object that i would be
willing to pick up but i can more or
less tell at a glance no no it's a
misconception that um
when we make things explicit
um we're closer to the truth because
often what we do when we make things
explicit is that we
conflate
uh half a dozen or more different
considerations that our intuitive and
unconscious minds are able to weigh
remarkably effectively we substitute for
that um holistic vision
a single thing that it collapses into
the explicit statement that we make and
so all the time that you're having to
make explicit what you would do under
what circumstances why you're limiting
the world you're you're driving it down
and down to less and less meaning
and one of the things that amused me
because i had of course patients with
ocd as well was that i had one
particular one
who was a philosopher and he said that
when he was studying anglo-american
analytic philosophy his ocd got
terrifically bad but when he was
studying phenomenological philosophy
uh his ocd relaxed and he was able to
see things in a much broader wider and
and more
sustainable and coherent way so i
thought that was a nice uh side light on
this
question of um the ocean but also one
also one relevant for for for treatment
considerations because if there are
focal disorders of narrowed perception
and that's a consequence of loss of
context i mean i can't i can't also help
seeing the recent arguments let's say
that are raging about gender identity in
exactly the same light is that we've
lost the context and so we're producing
these focal dysphorias because in a real
sense we're using the wrong part of our
brain to solve the problem and all the
public clamor about that as actually
making it worse not better okay so you
talked about the second part of your
book about
rationality and imagination and
intuition and science and what about the
third part well yes just before going
there if i may i just want to comment on
intuition and imagination because i
think they are extraordinarily important
for understanding the world and partly
due to dan kahneman's very entertaining
and successful books
a lot of people have come away with the
idea that intuition would be a very bad
thing to be guided by at any stage to
any degree
but i i say the these clever
scenarios that are set up by
psychologists in which you can show that
what you would probably intuitively
think is wrong are simply the
equivalence of optical illusions there
are optical illusions
that are so striking that you know i say
look those two lines are the same length
if you say they can't be but they are so
but i've never heard anybody after being
shown one of those optical illusions
going oh well that does it you know from
now on i'm never going to use my eyes
again but our intuition you know you can
set up these artificial situations in
which we
we seem to be getting things wrong by
following our intuitions that's often
because 99 percent of the time we
followed this intuition it would
intelligently and quickly take us to the
right solution
and so i i really want to rehabilitate
intuition i have some fascinating i
think studies that came to me people who
wrote to me after reading the master in
his emissary one's a man who tips horses
at races another is the physician who
looks after
the motorbike riders in something called
the tt races in the isle of man the most
dangerous sporting event in the world
and the reflections they have to make
about how these people are able to do
what they're doing through
um very much things that are identified
with the right hemisphere an intuitive
grasp that if they stop and think
explicitly they're completely ruined
they'll probably kill themselves so it's
like it's like thinking implicitly or
explicitly when you're trying to play a
piece on the piano absolutely
it interferes right away and i would say
that's really relevant we should we
should make this case quite clearly i
mean one of the things that really
disturbed me about the covid response
was we we reduced the entire entire
realm of political intuition to expert
knowledge yes and we made the assumption
that we could focus on one thing at the
expense of everything else yeah and and
that that was actually the right way to
do it to follow the science let's say
but the problem with that is that
complex political dis decisions are
often equivalent to diagnostic moves on
the part of a physician and we haven't
been able to develop expert systems that
can do diagnosis worth a damn and it's
because for however we do diagnosis it's
obviously dependent on our ability to
simultaneously apprehend a very wide
range of potentially relevant contextual
issues rather than reducing it to this
algorithmic process for example that the
person with ocd might demand yeah yeah
well i do
discuss um
medical diagnostics in the book because
interestingly in uh thinking fast
thinking slow there's a passage where
dan kahneman
says some things that struck me as very
odd um about physicians inability to be
consistent in their diagnoses and um i
have done a lot of um spade work in
research there are 5 600
papers referred to in the bibliography
of this book all of which were consulted
in the making of it and when kahneman
quotes these rather odd things i looked
them up and found that they didn't show
it didn't show what conneman says they
show at all in fact they showed the
opposite so it's it's always worth it oh
that's how you look
well well there we go
this work by kahneman you know this this
sort of thing has really annoyed me too
because i i read through these things
and i think just and i think your
optical illusion um a metaphor is really
a good one just because we can come up
with contrived situations where
intuition fails doesn't mean that
intuition doesn't function properly in a
huge range of appropriate contexts
absolutely
and can be much more subtle and much
more revealing and and we disattend to
it i mean it should always be something
that we could be skeptical about we
should be skeptical about our reasoning
we should be skeptical about science
science is a skeptical undertaking but
so there's nothing wrong with being
skeptical about it as well but we should
at least attend to it um and i think i
mean there's a lot more to say about
koben and maybe we'll come come there
later because there's there's a lot of
interest uh i think that connects
the hemisphere hypothesis
how would you define intuition and
imagination
well i
of course they are almost impossible to
define and and it's a mistake to think
that we can't discuss them until we've
clearly defined them often the only way
in which we can understand them is by
approaching them from different points
of view and and working out what they
are
um i use about eight different
categories of things
uh as possible
constituents of intuition things like
instinct
ready to go
knee-jerk
reactions heuristics
prejudices
which is an interesting area because
it's not as in anything like as
dire a situation as people now think um
that they yeah that's for sure yeah
anyway
but i i deal with those and with of
course the aha moments with um
scientific and philosophical insights
and then in imagination of course i'm
making the distinction which is a very
very important one between fantasy and
imagination i mean this is
this originates with
uh wordsworth and coleridge and no doubt
probably with shelling but um
the distinction is fantasy is something
that covers up reality and takes one
away from it but imagination is one's
only chance for feeding one's way into
reality
so
the the distinction that they were keen
to make was between the sort of a
prettifying augustine pastoral in which
lords and ladies dressed up as shepherds
and shepherd asses um that's fantasy and
imagination which was this divine gift
as both wordsworth and coleridge very
clearly saw it which enabled one by
paying a certain kind of attention to
have insight into the deep life of the
world of
obviously the living world of other
creatures but also of mountains of
rivers streams lakes and so forth to see
them in a new way and
actually experience them as real rather
than just categorical examples in the
way the left hemisphere isn't so in any
case all i'm really saying is that i
rehabilitate
intuition and imagination somewhat but
show their limitations and i um
i hope wave a flag for better science
and better reason there's nothing
at all wrong with science and reason in
themselves the problem nowadays is that
science is not scientific enough and our
reasoning is not reasonable enough
that the science i think the point there
is that um it has dogma science has at
the moment a number of dogmas we're due
a paradigm shift
and
to be ruled by dogmas not by following
the evidence is not scientific i'm i'm
curious about a couple of things on the
imagination and the and the hypothesis
front so i i want to offer you
another uh what foray into defining
where imagination might begin on the
fringes of rationality so
if you do give people creativity tests
one of the things you can do is you can
ask them for example how many uses can
you think of for a brick sure write them
down in three minutes and then you can
categorize those by number of responses
so that's a fluency response and then
you can categorize them by originality
and originality is something like uh
pragmatic utility so you have to
identify a real use for the brick but
also statistical
unlikelihood so the more original
responses are pragmatically practical
but also rare so then imagine that
there's a nexus of associations around
any given concept and the tighter the
associations
are the more they look rational in the
algorithmic sense and the looser the
associations the more they look
imaginative and that as you move out
into the looser associations your
probability of making a false positive
increases right because you're
associating two things that shouldn't be
associated but your possibility of
making a dramatic discovery also
increases because now you're associating
two things that have heretofore being
distinct of course but yeah okay so so
you can imagine that rationality shades
into imagination and then you made this
distinction that
fantasy is the misuse of imagination to
replace reality which is a nice
distinction and so and then so one twist
on that too one of the weird things
about the way science is scientific
science are educated scientists are
educated especially to write scientific
papers and to think about sciences we
think a lot about the method and we
think a lot about
writing the introduction to a scientific
paper as this algorithmic description of
the algorithmic process that we walk
through to get to the hypothesis but
that's rarely true you know like i had
one student who was very creative and
she'd come up with an idea that was a
leap an intuitive leap
and then i could see where she was going
but why and why but she didn't know how
she got from point a to point b and then
when she had to write out the
introductions to her paper she had to
come up with a story
about how she derived that logically
even though that had nothing to do with
how she came up with it and that's the
typical
thing that happens when we have to
consciously say how we did something the
left hemisphere which knows diddly squat
about how we actually did get there
comes up with its own version of how it
would have got there if it had been in
control which it wasn't so
um you're absolutely right that most of
the great discoveries in science and
maths were made intuitively through
pattern recognition through seeing
gestalt they weren't made by following a
linear sequence and even
i mean this this is a point that's made
by george g lord simpson who's after one
of the founders of the modern synthesis
of what it's worth but i mean he he says
you know the scientific method as such
is more or less a fiction in that it's
right
more honored in the in the breach than
the observance although it is a useful
paradigm to have at the back of your
mind for a lot of the rather plotting
early work in science and reason so what
i what i want to be able to say here
is that there's no conflict between
science reason imagination and intuition
in good science they all work together
in good reason they all work together in
good intuition they all contribute and
so forth so
there is no need for these things to be
set up as they so often are is in
conflict with one another and another
important element is that it's actually
the right hemisphere contribution to
them more obviously in the case of
intuition and imagination but
nonetheless importantly in reason and
science it is the right hemisphere's
contribution that is a really important
one
well i was just thinking about einstein
in light of our conversation i mean when
einstein published those three
remarkable papers back i believe it was
in the 1920s he had spent a tremendous
amount of time in the world of the
imagination imagining for example what
it would be like to travel at the speed
of light and we could also point out i
think as well that the imagination
differs from the uh propositional in
that it actually does rely on images
more and images are closer to the world
in some sense than linguistic concepts
and so the imagination tends to be less
linguistic and reductive and abstracted
than the then the purely linguistic and
so it's richer but but not as precise
no no absolutely and
in the book i look at so many examples
of of um how this is true that
what we need is this broader um
combination
of intuitive work and more routine
humdrum
work
um and
einstein himself famously used to say
that it took him a long time afterwards
to explain in words how he reached
conclusions that he
found came to him sometimes while
playing music and of course music is a
perfect example of what i call
betweenness it is only connection it is
only gestalt the notes in themselves
have no significances only as they come
together in the patterns that we call
music that they have come to have their
meaning and incidentally um you said
that
if we start breaking things up uh and
get explicit about the playing of the
music we won't play it well exactly but
that doesn't make
um a sort of left hemisphere procedural
um analysis of the piece worthless so i
i sometimes say that everything has this
structure that it's the right
hemispheres open
active receptivity that allows something
to come into being for us to presence to
us
um and that then
um it goes to the left hemisphere where
it's um seen as oh yes it's one of those
we put it in one of those categories and
it's abstracted taken out of context and
so on and then that work having been
done
it should be taken back into the right
hemisphere where a new
richer hole can be created now that's
perfectly
imaged in a piece of music you're
attracted to it as a whole the right
hemisphere phase you then start to play
it and discover that you have to
practice over and over again a certain
piece of fingering because it's
difficult you look at the harmonic
structure of the piece and that helps
you understand it but then finally when
you go out on stage and play it you must
forget all of that otherwise you won't
be able to play a note but that doesn't
mean that time was wasted
the left hemisphere's contribution is
very important but the point is it's
always
the intermediary stage it shouldn't be
the final stage but in our culture we
take things apart analyze them fragment
them and that we have like a heap of
bits on the garage floor where there
used to be a motorbike and we go oh i
have no idea what all this stuff means
that's where we end the story
um and of course a motorbike is a bad
example of what we're talking about
because i'm talking about organisms
which are nothing it's all like machines
but anyway you wanted me to move on to
talk about the third part and so that we
can
cover a little bit of that and yeah well
and then we'll go back to the first and
start walking through it again so yeah
go on to the third part yeah well the
third part is so the second part is
epistemology that's what i've just
described and the third part is
metaphysics so what when we've
decided that we know how to weigh the
different paths and the different
portals to an understanding of the world
what do we actually find there
and in the first few chapters of part
three the final part of the book i look
at two elements one is as i say the
conjunction of opposites which is so
important
uh and
it's something we've completely lost
sight of and by the way of course jung
was um cognizant of um
but we often think nowadays that we
think in a very linear left hemisphere
way that opposites are the two ends of a
pole and as long as you keep moving
further and further in a certain
direction you get further and further
away from the thing that you feared but
often we come back and find ourselves
actually approaching the very thing we
feared because
you know
famously too much desire for freedom
causes tyranny
and you know so
these
just for one example but so i look at
that
and there's a lot to say about that but
i i shan't say it now and then there's a
chapter on the one and the many which is
an ancient thing in philosophy at least
in eastern philosophy but it's also
something we can't ignore in any kind of
philosophy the difference between the
individual and the unique and the value
of it and its place in a whole which it
doesn't by its uniqueness and
individuality do anything to
to impair it doesn't it doesn't help
disintegrate that hole in fact it
enriches it i sometimes give the idea of
a bud or a flower that unfolds and you
see all the different parts of it but
those parts have done nothing to
make the the bud less whole in fact it's
now made it a richer hole the flower so
there's those are the the two on
structure and then there are what you
might call the constituents of reality
so i look at guess what time i look at
space i look at flow
i look at matter and consciousness which
i take to be
aspects of the same
foundational
element in the cosmos and then
perhaps through many people's surprise
but to a lot of readers already
highly expressed delight i look at
values and purpose and the sense of the
sacred as irreducible elements that we
don't make up
um as we're painting them on the walls
of our room in order to cheer ourselves
up but we we don't invent them but we
discover them if we can in other words
the business of living is about
discovering
exploring unveiling these values that
purpose and that sense of the sacred
so
this is the one of the arguments that
i've been having with people like
richard dawkins for example and
sometimes when the religious types take
richard dawkins on
they accept some of his a priory
presuppositions and that scuttles them
from the beginning and one of the
presuppositions and this allows the
scientist scientism types to win in
religious arguments all the time is that
they basically make the presumption that
a religious system is a set of
science-like propositions about the
world and its description when in fact
the religious
enterprise much more broadly construed
involves no shortage of experiences like
awe which are i mean awe involves pilot
erection and pilot erection is a
response that's 60 million years old and
these and
i that religious experience domain of
religious experience also involves
phenomena like
our our
our sense of being intensely gripped and
moved by the meaning that is produced by
artistic beauty and music and
and ritual and dance and all these
things that are embodied and emotional
and motivational far far deeper than any
cognitive overlay and to reduce the
religious enterprise to a series of
descriptions about the world is to do it
great disservice but also to make it
entirely demolishable on the scientific
reductionist materialist atheist front
yes you're so right about the importance
of awe and wonder and recently there was
a day uh in oxford of seminars devoted
to my work on which that was the theme
and i gave a lecture at the end on that
which i hope is available somewhere i
didn't think it was filmed actually
interestingly but i think i may have put
the text up on my channel channel
mcgillcrist but it is a very very
important element and of course it's
quite different from sheer curiosity we
don't say i'm curious to know what god
is like
we don't say i'm curious to know what
the meaning of life is things that
strike us as marvelous or inspiring or
wonderful have a great depth and once we
lose that sense we collapse them into
this the little bit of the world that is
illuminated in the dark when we flash uh
our torch around a lumber room and we
see little bits and pieces but actually
if you didn't do that but allowed your
eyes to adapt you'd see that there was a
rich sky a universe a cosmos beyond
so all of that is is extremely important
you're quite right about
it seems that scientists don't seem to
understand different kinds of knowledge
or meaning and they they they don't
imagine that
somehow king lear would be less
important as a play if one could
demonstrate as indeed one can that if
there was indeed a historic um
historic lear king lear um the story of
that king was completely different from
one toe by shakespeare
in evaluating shakespeare's play has
more truth in it than many a book of
genetics
but it's just of a different kind of
truth is it well the best lecture on
evolutionary biology the differences in
men and women in evolutionary biology
the best lecture i ever saw was wagner's
uh dye meister singer which nailed it
the the libretto nails the difference
between men and women in the
psychological sociological and
theological sense almost perfectly and
wagner went places that the evolutionary
biologists haven't yet gone as far as i
can tell i'm writing about that in my
new book it sounds very interesting
there is this well i want to ask you
something you said something very deep
very in a very
uh truncated manner that i wanted to
return to and i i i saw some of this
emerging in the parts of your book that
i was reading most recently
you talked about
you talked about the collapse of the
waveform and the collapse of possibility
into actuality and the role of the right
hemisphere in doing that and you just
walked through a sequence of thoughts
where you said that the right hemisphere
in some sense presents the global
meaningful contextual reality to us and
then we break it down into parts and
master it um jonathan pajot told me by
the way that
when god tells people at the beginning
of time that the purpose of mankind is
to subdue
reality what it means is sub do to give
everything its proper place in the
hierarchy of being and so that would
extend all the way from the conceptual
to the transcendent let's say but to
it's sort of like making jacob's ladder
that's another image that i would say
and your vision of the left hemisphere
operating at the level of detail in the
right hemisphere operating at the level
of totality and the need for all of that
to be fleshed out simultaneously with no
loss on either end seems to me to be in
keeping with like the jacob's ladder
vision and the idea of subduing reality
with with the logos which is how it's
laid out in genesis i'll just make an
aside on jacob's ladder to me what is
completely wonderful is blake's image of
this which is unlike any other image
mostly the image of the ladder is a
straight ladder like that but blake's
image is of a spiral and i think there's
an enormous amount of depth in that the
idea that as you go up you and and
approach nearer to heaven you your
process is not just simply linear but
also in a way circular but not in such a
way that you come back to as elliot said
the place where you first started and i
know it for the first time but you
actually come back to a position which
is similar to where you were but now on
a higher plane and you can look down and
see where you were before and you can
relate these two things so you can see
both the progress and the return in one
but anyway um
what i wanted to
distinguish was
i do um
talk about the collapse of the wave
function and um
and and quantum field theory but what i
don't think i do say at least explicitly
because i don't know
enough to be able to state that is that
that
um collapse is caused by the right
hemisphere i don't i don't know that at
all i mean what what we know is that
somehow it's connected with the tension
and there's plenty in the physicists um
suggesting that and particularly in
paulie's work that the quality of the
attention paid may change uh how that
process is carried out and what results
from it but i mean that is speculative
well you know that's worth wandering
down for a second or two you know it's
definitely the case if you think about
imagination and intuition that imagine
that in some sense you lay out or you
ask for a revelation of a vision of the
world that could be to guide you and
let's say that you would like to bring a
better world into being and so and you
make that part of your meditative
practice and part of your ethical goal
and it's true in a fundamental sense and
then what that means is that
as a consequence of that practice your
attention is going to be paid to those
pathways and phenomena that make the
bringing of a better world into being a
more real possibility and we certainly
do believe that we can dream and then
achieve and we do believe that we can't
even achieve without dreaming and so
obviously there's some relationship
between our ability to intuit and
imagine and
the manifestation of the reality that we
experience itself because otherwise we
why would thought be useful or vision be
useful or planning be useful so it's
speculative in some sense but in another
sense it's it's
what do we do we're going to operate
randomly or we're going to operate with
vision we come back to the importance of
attention and i sometimes say attention
is a moral act because it changes right
what actually is there in the world for
us to find and it also changes us so it
has very important consequences it's not
it's not just a passive process like the
exposure of a photographic plate it's an
active open receptivity which is going
to meet whatever it is that comes out of
that world to which we attend so it is
it is a very important point there well
so so let's delve into that because it's
a yeah like i think it's a key insight
to
make the case that attention is a moral
act and i believe that
our ideas of heavenly hierarchy in some
sense are an intuitive representation
representation of the ethical hierarchy
fragmented or united as it may be that
actually directs our attention and that
a couple i'll just decorate that a
little bit if it's not united then it's
fragmentary and that causes anxiety if
it is united it has to be united towards
some transcendent goal and that would be
something like
well let's say
well in in the mythological sense that's
something like the paradisal vision
right that's the best all things could
be you know the the idea of the logos
that god uses in genesis 1 to create the
order that is good out of nothing that
logos is basically conceptualized as
something like
truth in language and imagination
serving love
and so the idea in some sense is the
direction of attention towards
possibility oriented towards love
in infused by truth produces the order
that is habitable and good and that
ideas and that's the image of god in man
and woman and god stresses that
repeatedly in genesis right that he has
this intent that's logos guided and
every day of creation which is the
interaction of potential to bring in new
order is then deemed as good and i think
the reason it's good is because it's
brought into being under the auspices of
love and truth and so this idea that
attention is an ethical act man this is
a killer revolutionary idea
yes but it goes hand in hand with
something else that's highly relevant to
what you've just been saying which is
that i argue that
all that exists is in relation
um
one of the ways of
constru there are many ways of
constraining the meaning of the title
the matter with things partly it's a pun
on our obsession with material and uh
obsession with the idea that the world
is made up of things um
never mind the reference to the fact
that there seems to be something that is
the matter with things at the moment but
another way of thinking about it is that
these things that we call things and i
don't have any quarrel with us using the
word in daily life are ultimately
relations so that all that exists is is
relation and that the relationship is
prior to what we call the thing the
relative
so
[Music]
the relationship you can't after all if
you think of anything as existing in a
context
it is what it is because of its
relationships to try and suggest that it
is something separate from those
relationships is all ready to have
made a an essential error in
misunderstanding so i argued that that
all that exists is relational
and that of course is what attention is
it's a way of disposing your attention
to the world but what is lovely is that
you raise this issue of love as a core
part of creation which is a common theme
to every religious tradition all over
the world
um and that idea of course
whatever it is that we mean by god is a
relation love love love cannot be
anything other than relational and that
the the creation which you referred to i
see the story of this creation as the
constant unfolding of some
god and the universe that are in process
together and each coming to know
themselves more and more deeply in this
process this would be um a and
whiteheads vision and i have more
respect for whitehead than for any
philosopher of the last 100 years
well so so here's another
twist on that that might be interesting
to you so
i've been thinking i thought a long time
about the relationship between truth and
love and their union in this notion of
logos which encompass encompasses both
logic and also the embodiment of
something like the divine word
simultaneously and maybe that's the
bringing together of the greek and the
judeo-christian tradition in some
fundamental sense but we could also
think about the opposite of that so
in uh
guerta's
mephistopheles uh
in in faust his character mephistopheles
is the great adversary and
mephistopheles credo is that
being is so permeated by suffering and
catastrophe and tragedy and betrayal
that it would be better if it was just
brought to a halt and so his motivation
is to
destroy and eliminate
the ultimate in nihilism and you know in
some sense we're pulled in the world
between those two poles right because
part of us would like to build something
better and to bring what's greater and
more magnificent into being and another
part of us is bitter and resentful about
the tragedy and catastrophe of of of
existence and so and i do believe that
those fundamental polls that's cain and
abel in some sense they wore for
a war for
domination of our intentional resources
you know and part of what religious
practice is is to what fortify
your capacity to operate on the side of
life more abundant and truth in its
service and to move away from that
nihilism that's
terror based and a consequence of what
would you say um bitterly apprehending
existential catastrophe and that this
notion of that religious war that's
part and parcel of that battle it is a
battle for the domination of intentional
resources because that is key to what
brings
reality into being out of the realm of
possibility
yes
one way of thinking about the problem
you eliminated by referring to
mephistopheles in faust
is
that what mephistopheles doesn't
understand is
that you cannot have
a thing without its opposite and so
there's this left hemisphere fantasy
that we can create a world in which all
is simply peace and joy and there is no
suffering involved
i don't believe that this is a
possibility blake actually also said
that in heaven there must be some degree
of suffering otherwise it couldn't be
joy
but i think our way of thinking is to
distinguish these things too sharply and
i i i'm surprised in a way
i know why you've concentrated on the
word logos because it is that greek word
in the new testament um but
going back in history the greeks thought
that there were two ways in which one
could approach truth
one was logos and one was mythos and
myth has now changed its meaning to mean
something untrue but there's nothing in
the word myth that means it's untrue
indeed they believed that myths were the
ways in which the only ways in which you
could embody and communicate the really
deep truths and that logos was an
essentially trivial thing that could be
used in a bad way as it were by a lawyer
in order to win a case but really when
you when you're concerned with finding
out the depths of reality then mythos is
important that links to what you were
saying i think earlier about
the the necessity for myths and
narratives in order to be able to
understand what it is we're dealing with
science has its own myths and narratives
that's the interesting thing a lot of
scientists think that there are known
myths and narratives in science but if
you think that there isn't one you have
espoused the myth and the narrative of a
science that always makes progress and
in which
there is a mechanism unfold that all can
be reduced ultimately to
the
the idea of the machine that is the
model that is espoused by those people
who think there is no model in science
right well you know one of the things
that really struck me about dawkins when
i went to talk to him is that despite
his atheism so here's two things that
are crucial as far as i'm concerned
dawkins and scientists like him believe
in the transcendent object so they
believe that there's an ontology outside
of the domain of epistemology unlike the
post-modernists and it isn't obvious to
me at all that we can maintain our
belief in the transcendent object
without maintaining our belief in the
transcendent and he didn't see that or
doesn't see that as an axiomatic
faith-based presupposition of the
scientific
endeavor per se and then dawkins who i
believe is an admirable man and a
genuine seeker after truth because he is
a credible scientist and you can't be
that without that dawkins always accepts
axiomatically before setting foot in the
scientific ring let's say that the truth
will set you free
yes so
and that's not a within science
presumption right that's that's what you
have to bring to the table before you
can engage in the scientific endeavor i
mean that that's a very nice
introduction to the chapter i have on
values in which i suggest that as i say
um truth goodness and beauty are things
that we we find we dis dis
cover not that we invent i mean although
the particular ways in which we see them
at any one moment in history may be
slightly different although those
differences are greatly exaggerated
there's enormous consonants throughout
the world and across time on what we
find to constitute beautiful good and
true
um
but in any case the the question i ask
is if you believe that the universe is
purposeless
meaningless
and a heap of
material stuff that has no importance
colliding with other parts of itself in
an endless process of um collision and
destruction
why would truth matter to you why does
truth seem so important to scientists i
know why truth matters to me yeah
exactly because that's part of that
because i i believe that the universe is
a much richer one in which values like
truth have meaning but in that universe
why would truth be important because
after all
if you really believe nothing then the
the most you could do would be to say
but let's give people pleasure and
comfort
but why would a scientist set out to
destroy the pleasure and comfort that
somebody might find in their religious
belief because they believed it wasn't
true the very fact that they elevate
truth like that seems to me to suggest
that they have ipso facto a belief in a
kind of transcendent set of values
well i think that's beyond question i
mean this is why i was so convinced when
i read jung's work on alchemy in
particular that science was necessarily
embedded inside a narrative tradition
that was least implicit and so we could
say the scientists ignore the mythos
when they don't concentrate on the
process of hypothesis generation and
they don't look at the role of
imagination and intuition especially in
the revolutionary scientific process and
that's just a matter of epistemological
and philosophical blindness as far as
i'm concerned and then the next thing is
that it's clearly the case that science
is embedded in a redemptive enterprise
because part of the enlightenment uh
ethos that motivated science and
scientists was the notion that if we
came in contact with the ontology of the
object outside of her epistemology and
we were humble in face of the revelation
of these new truths that what we would
do
would alleviate suffering and bring the
world to a better state of being and so
to operate as a scientist to be so
because here's an example ian this is
something
so i read this this book a while back uh
a kbgb agent wrote about um some of the
experiments the soviets were doing on
the biological warfare front and
they were trying to hybridize
smallpox and ebola and then aerosolize
it to produce a super bug that could be
distributed in cities that would be
extraordinarily contagious and
extraordinarily fatal and so here's the
question
if you're a scientist
why isn't that as good a pursuit as any
other
because it's just a factual matter right
it's just a clockwork mystery in some
sense why not see how smallpox and ebola
go together and you might say well it's
preposterous to even question that but
it's not no no i i would i would um
i can imagine
an atheistic scientist saying but
there's nothing about being an atheistic
scientist that means that i shouldn't be
kind and i shouldn't care about other
human beings and therefore it would be
quite wrong for me to do this dastardly
thing yeah but that's the issue is well
there's a wrong there okay where does
that come from exactly and i don't see
that it can be derived except from this
superordinate mythos that we've been
describing well i think it's better
um
based in a much bigger broader vision i
i agree but i i still think that it's a
perfectly
sensible remark and i think that dawkins
would probably say something like this i
must put words in his mouth but that you
know just because i don't believe in a
divine realm doesn't mean that i don't
have moral values i think it'd be
wrong to suggest that i mean it would be
a basic error to suggest that atheists
are somehow
therefore immoral
oh well i don't want to i definitely
don't want to uh no make the case that
atheists are by you know as a class any
necessarily more immoral than any other
classical people i'm just i'm just
pointing out and
maybe i will push you here a little bit
the the thing is even if it is kindness
and i'm perfectly willing to assume that
it might be kindness and that that will
get you somewhere
that kindness itself
is outside the scientific domain because
we could talk about kindness in terms of
kinship and we could talk about in terms
of relation and biological um what would
you say reciprocity but it's in the
ethical domain specifically speaking and
not in this reductive scientific domain
well that's right but i mean the very
fact that you talk in terms of biology
and kinship and
thriving and so on it would be meat and
drink to the kind of atheistic
scientists that i'm talking about i
don't think it would be logical for them
to say but you know that's perfectly
encompassable in my way of thinking
and i i don't think though that they can
understand um i don't think that with
that world picture
you can understand
why
there is
goodness at all
and i don't know why i don't think you
can understand why there is beauty
interestingly scientists think that
beauty is a tougher one for sure really
really interesting one because
scientists think they've answered the
question of beauty it's to do with a
mate selection and and so forth and but
darwin himself twice
points out that given the existence of
beauty it can be used by evolution in
certain ways but it doesn't explain what
beauty is or how it ever came into being
in the first place he said why why do so
why do certain colors certain forms so
on actually attract and have this beauty
for for animals birds and of course for
ourselves as humans and there are many
things right well and it's that cross
species similarity that's so interesting
you know butterflies apparently can
detect a one part in a million deviation
from symmetry on the part of potential
mating partners and fair enough but that
doesn't explain why we think butterflies
are beautiful
i clearly do
i'm glad i'm not meeting with a
butterfly
i know one one part in a million man
that's pretty but i mean it's obvious
that butterflies have high standards i
mean they have very high standards but
of course what's interesting is that
humans don't necessarily find symmetry
more attractive and there are studies
that show that in fact human beings find
faces that are symmetrical spooky
um mechanistic and and you know they
actually find um an asymmetry in the
face or in the form more attractive so
anyway so an optimal asymmetry there is
an optimal asymmetry right i often say
that we we don't
we don't want just symmetry or asymmetry
but we want the asymmetry of symmetry
with asymmetry
rather as i say
the left hemisphere wants either or he
wants things black and white the right
hemisphere is able to see that they can
be both hand and
i don't think we should dismiss the what
the left hemisphere has just has to
offer so we need not either either or
both hand but both either or and both
and
well you see that with music you know i
mean you want a certain degree of
algorithmic predictability in any
musical piece but if it devolves into
algorithmic predictability it just
sounds like a drum machine absolutely
and the whole business of roberto which
is responsible for
so much of the meaning in music which is
often so fine that it can hardly be
specifically detected consciously but it
gives the life to the piece and when you
hear it played by by a machine it
certainly seems completely dead right
and you see that difference too in the
difference between analog and digital
musical instruments because with an
analog instrument you can capitalize on
its imperfection in an unbelievably
interesting way you can really make it
an analog instrument like a piano sing
yeah and it's really hard to do that
with a digital instrument and that is i
mean digital instruments have their
advantages but they don't sing like
analog instruments do no i've never
tried playing a digital instrument but i
um what you say suggests um
yes suggests the likelihood that you're
that's exactly right well you lose the
context with the digital instrument to
some degree because if you're playing a
piano and you hit the hammers the whole
thing the whole piano and the whole room
starts to vibrate yes and you can play
with all that if you listen to it and
you really can't get to do that with a
digital instrument which like i said has
their utility so tell me more about your
fascination with beauty because i'll
just do a little intro to that one of
the things that really propelled me down
the root of the investigation that ran
on similar tracks as yours was my
realization when i was in my mid-20s
that music had an intrinsic meaning and
depth that was neither reducible to
propositions nor uh just nor could be
destroyed by propositional objection
absolutely you know so you might say
well the world is not meaningful it's
like okay what about music oh yeah music
is meaningful well why well i don't know
can you criticize it well i can but it
doesn't have any effect on the meaning
of the music and so the meaning of the
music which is part of its beauty
clearly and that spiraling you talked
about bach did that perfectly with the
brandenburg concerto say that continual
jacob's ladder spiraling that goes
upward and upward but in some sense
returns to the same place it's a
brilliant example of that but so tell me
what gripped you about beauty
philosophically and why you decided to
focus on that in relation to values
well i i'm afraid i'm rather
comprehensive in this book which is why
it's so long so i do
i do look at the various at least the
three most important values to me which
are goodness truth and beauty and
whatever um keats who is a very fine
poet um may have said about this truth
and beauty can't simply be equated we
wouldn't have two different words and
i'm afraid that sometimes beauty can be
other than good and other than true
however and that's not to say that it
always is often it is a pathway to
something both truthful and and very
good
what you say about music is is important
because it suggests you know a note has
no meaning whatever
put several hundred thousand together
and you've got
some matthew passion how does that
happen it's entirely to do with the
relationships between the notes which
make the harmony make the melody and
make the ictus of the whole thing so
that's a very important part and as you
say it can't be
reduced to
reason
uh so
it's not for that reason irrational i i
i think we need to make a distinction
between things that
cannot be encompassed by reason but are
not for that reason
irrational they may be trans-rational or
epiphenomenal you know people like
pinker one of the things i take issue
with pinker and those cognitive
scientist types often is that they
attempt to reduce the realm of the
cultural including the realm of
beautiful to like a cognitive spandrel
right there are side effects of our
cognitive ability and that seems to me
to be put in the cart before the
horoscope oh absolutely
i think somewhere pinker says that
music is
a useless acceptation of speech um about
right exactly exactly and he compares it
kind of the other way around actually
compares it to pornography and
cheesecake and but anyway we don't need
to waste time on that why do i find
beauty so very compelling partly because
of the part it's
played in my life since my teens the
extraordinary power for me of uh poetry
and and art and music to which i've more
or less devoted a large part of my life
um i mean in a very i'm not making a big
claim i'm not a creator but i mean they
have guided my life and they've also
guided me towards the sense of the
sacred i think that if you listen to
certain kinds of music it's rather inane
to say
to reduce it to well it's uh attractive
in certain ways it is but there's a
certain kind of music and i think
particularly of the
100 years of the great polyphony of of
the
um
of people like palestinian victoria bird
telus lasses
simply
cries out for another category to be
brought to bear on it namely that of the
soul or the spirit
but
it it's greatly exaggerated that it's
somehow a cultural artifact so for
example
so so for example we know that we know
that
norwegians who uh have know nothing
about
um the structure of indian music
nonetheless can say what the meaning of
certain passages in in raga
what that meaning is and it will cohere
with what an indian intended by playing
that piece
and you know it's very obvious that we
find oriental art staggeringly beautiful
our museums are full of it and our
museums are also full of people from the
far east coming to visit them they don't
think that somehow it's ugly because
it's not part of their tradition one of
the most moving things that i've i've
seen i just want to say this because i
hope that some viewers will look it up
and
there's a piece on the internet
um of uh amazon an amazonian tribesmen
being shown a film by a french film crew
of snapshots as it were or little um
short clips
illustrating our way of life
and
they express horror at what we do to
trees what we do to animals what we do
to our elderly how we have no respect
for the sacred in the cosmos all these
things and then there is this absolutely
electrifying moment when they play
maria callis singing casta diva from
[Music]
bellini's norma
and suddenly they all fall silent and
something that has never happened before
happens one of the young men stands up
and moves towards the camera and says
this is not our culture but we feel
there is something very special and
beautiful in it and then an old man says
to me it is overwhelming i feel that it
is um divine or sacred
so i i think that is quite extraordinary
and it gives the light of the idea that
these things are simply made up any old
how by a culture
well the other thing too in like we can
afford to be dead serious about such
things as scientists if you look at the
way the brain processes language it's
obviously the case that the musical
element is not simply a secondary
spandrel absolutely no because we know
perfectly well that when you and i are
talking and when everyone is listening a
huge part of the emotional information
that we're conveying and the
motivational excitement for example we
know perfectly well that that's carried
by the melody of our speech yes and we
know that music might be an elaboration
of the melodic element of speech but
that doesn't mean that
music is reducible to speech like i
would say if you were looking at this
from the perspective of a hard-headed
biologist you would say what nietzsche
said which was that language emerged
from music not the other way around
that makes a lot more sense from an
evolutionary perspective because animals
use
sound not language to communicate and
the linguistic came out of the musical
and so it's
clearly not a secondary phenomenon it's
way deeper and that that intuition of
meaning you know that one of the things
that i i want to tell you about my
theory of music just for a second i
think you might like it and and so
what i realized about music was that it
it consists of patterns and when that's
not a brilliant observation but then it
consists of these interleaved patterns
that are stacked on top of one each
other that work in a harmonious struc in
a harmonious manner all simultaneously
and you know you can walk through a
complex piece of music listening to one
musical instrument or another
participating in that guest all pattern
and i thought well why is that
meaningful why is that and then people
think well music isn't representational
and then i thought wait a second that's
wrong music is the most representational
art form because the world isn't made
out of objects it's made out of patterns
and what music calls us to do is to
attend to the harmonious interplay of
the patterns of being and to bring
ourselves into alignment with that and
there is no higher call than that and
the reason that music is meaningful is
because that meaning really exists is
that is what we need to do is to align
ourselves harmoniously with the plethora
of the patterns of being that exist at
multiple levels and so it is a call to
proper action in the world and that is
meaningful yes i i wouldn't disagree i
mean except perhaps to say
i i
prefer the concept of
it allowing something to presence rather
than a representation say music is
representational i know what you mean in
that it it acts on our bodies in a
metaphorical way that rising and falling
phrases affect our blood pressure our
muscular um the tension in our skeletal
muscles our blood pressure our pelvis
they make as you say our hair stand on
then being tears our eyes it's a very
physical thing um and so in that sense
it is very active on us through what i
would call bringing into present
something rather than actually just
representing it
so ian in in some sense i hate to do
this but since we are trying to build
jacob's ladder all the way down to the
level of detail maybe we could delve a
little bit more into the
the practical necessity of such
knowledge so why do you think this this
matters in the concrete sense to and why
do you think that we're dominated now by
what you might describe as this left
hemisphere
reduced ideological view of the world
yes i i
i may well have compiled
one of the most comprehensive analyses
of hemisphere differences in the 450
pages of the first part of this book but
it's not just
of technical interest it seems to me to
be part of a very important overall
philosophical project as i explained we
don't know how to evaluate different
thing i have a whole chapter on
paradoxes by the way in which one can
see that one
arm of a paradox comes from the left
hemisphere and one from the right
hemisphere and guess what the one that
comes to the right hemisphere actually
describes what we know to be real anyway
to come
to pan back a bit
i feel that there is something
i think we all know that there's
something
amiss
with the vision we have of the world at
the moment and that's the other meaning
of the title the matter with things
and another subtitle is our brains our
delusions and the unmaking of the world
and i think we're unmaking the world in
several respects
one is very familiar which is the
disfoliation destruction desecration
of the natural world of forests of seas
and so forth and the consequences that
that will have for us
but another is a complete
misunderstanding
of the human being
who is now seen as a kind of a machine
perhaps even not a very efficient
machine perhaps it would be better if we
were hybridized with a machine all of
this speaks to me of something that is
profoundly missing
um
the meaning of a human being and a human
life
and we seem to have we seem to have lost
our compass we seem to have lost all
bearings
and part of this is i think because we
are dominated by the way in which the
left hemisphere sees the world the left
hemisphere after all helps you grab
stuff but it doesn't do anything else in
terms of helping you understand it the
understanding of the world comes from
the right hemisphere but it's the left
hemisphere that makes you
rich powerful for a while and it always
seems to take over just as a
civilization goes into tail spin and
declines so you see this with the
acquisition of two great territory in
both the greek and the roman
civilizations and you see it again with
the expansionism of the west in the last
150 200 years since the enlightenment
and what seems to happen is that partly
because of the necessity of
administering a huge realm whether that
be a
military realm or or a civil realm or a
commercial realm
that requires the generation of rather
rigid inhuman rules that can be applied
in all situations and therefore the
takeover of essentially the bureaucratic
mind it's not to oversimplify to say
that what many of the troubles that we
have now are because of the
extraordinary expansion of the the
bureaucratic vision of the world in
which the human is left out and it's not
caused i think by
a sinister
um cabal i i you know the paranoid idea
there's a group of people who are really
wanting to control the rest of us i mean
i can't rule it out but i think much
more likely from my experience in life i
i believe that there are more cock-ups
and there are conspiracies yes
yes and that in this particular case
um
it's something that is bigger than all
of us including those members of
government's uh administrative bodies
bureaucracies
themselves they're the victims of this
same thing well you're you're talking
about it as a neurological proclivity in
some sense which is way more very deeper
and more profound than any mere
manifestation let me ask you a
mythological question so i've been
spending a lot of time
trying to unpack the story of the tower
of babel
and so
what happens after the catastrophe of
cain and abel in genesis is you get two
negative outcomes let's say to
let's say sinful existence and one would
be the chaotic flood that envelops noah
and the other then
and so that's like the catastrophe of
the natural world gone completely
uncontrollable the next is the
catastrophe of the bureaucratic state
and so the tower of babel is an attempt
to replace the heavenly hierarchy by a
human creation
and the consequence of that is the
destruction of the ability to
communicate and so what happens is that
fundamental perceptual categories
perceptual and linguistic categories
become
what would you say they become unstable
as this top heavy administrative
process develops and and it is a it is
an element of luciferian presumption
it's the attempt to replace the context
by the part i think i think it is and
it's interesting that even adorno back
in the forties was describing what he
saw then
as the
administered world the fifa volta velti
said
which is and and i don't want anyone to
think that i'm just talking about
bureaucracy but bureaucracy right
as an image of a whole way of thinking
which is the mechanistic one yeah the
reductionist one the wonderful
one that there are rules and so on and
what this does is it privileges the
theory over the reality yes absolutely
that's what the post modernists do
as
has been pointed out experience has
fallen in value and instead theories
about how life should be have become
the reality and this is something you
notice in bureaucracies that actually
having ticked the box is more important
than the event in the real world which
that was supposed to um
you know to to evaluate so for example
in medicine
um it it's quite possible to do
extremely good medicine but if it's not
catalogued in a certain way and certain
boxes weren't ticked it doesn't count
and it didn't happen
so well and i do think it is important
as you point out it's extremely
important to
note that this is a deeper problem than
merely that which is manifested by any
of its manifestations exactly we don't
want to blame the bureaucrats and the
notion that there's an evil cabell well
there is the world economic forum and
they might count but fundamentally we're
looking at something that's much more
profound and it is something like i do
think it's something that's represented
in christianity for example of the as
the luciferian presumptions of the
untrammeled intellect and it is
associated with this idea of left
hemisphere domination it's it's hyper
systematization at the context of at the
cost of the whole
yes i i think that's right and one thing
that struck me very much in
the last few years is that the the myth
of the master and his chemistry on which
the
you know that the title of the first
book or the earlier book is based
is something that actually crops up all
around the world that there is a wise
ruler and there is an intemperate
hot-headed general or underling who
wishes to
who actually is put out
by the feeling that there is this more
powerful
being and actually once he wants to use
up that being
a very common theme common theme and one
and but there are actually
this precise myth of the being two
beings one of them that is willing to
take under its aegis the other and to
allow it to work well but that other
doesn't want that like satan yeah in in
milton's in paradise absolutely
absolutely absolutely it has a very
expression of resentment envy and the
desire to destroy if it cannot own
something and this seems the
really important element in the picture
that we're looking at
yeah well i think it's the crucial
element i think you're putting your
finger on uh milton's lucifer is
absolutely perfect
you know i i thought about milton
in relationship to
the rise of totalitarian states and so
milton was writing about luciferian
presumption before totalitarian states
in the modern sense really came into
being and one of the things that his
poetic genius intuited was that our
luciferian intellectual presumptions
would entice us into producing
representational systems that would then
attempt to replace the territory with
the map and to privilege epistemology
and to privilege
this narrow rationality that you're
describing above all and then also to
insist upon that
representation and that replacement you
know you really saw this with the
soviets right where the soviets and the
maoists they were so insistent that
their representation replaced reality
that it became criminal to admit that
you were suffering it's like you can't
be hungry the state is perfect yes oh
yes and you know in venezuela they've
made it illegal in venezuela they made
it illegal to list starvation as a cause
of death by physicians wow
but yeah
what fascinates me there is that denial
is one of the key features of the left
hemisphere's take on the world and it's
so striking
in medical cases that people who've had
a right hemisphere stroke will claim
that black is white they will just deny
that a completely obviously uselessly
paralyzed limb is fully under their
control and they can move there isn't
anything wrong at all well so
in keeping with your notion and
goldberg's notion of the right
hemisphere let's say as an anomaly
detection system so imagine this you
know how you know what happens when you
have a tooth pulled eh it takes your
tongue and it'll do this all by itself
like three months of exploratory work to
map out that new crevice and so you
imagine that your left hemisphere built
up or there's a representation of that
section of your mouth that's
unbelievably highly detailed
and then you upset it and now there's an
anomaly detected by the right it says oh
oh there's something here that where the
map no longer matches the territory and
then there's all this exploratory work
that has to be done in order to map out
the contours of the mouth and the mouth
is really relevant because you know the
mouth and the tongue are unbelievably
uh thoroughly represented at a
neurological level and so like it takes
six months or three months of constant
busy work to refamiliarize yourself just
with the inside of your mouth so now
let's say you have
right hemisphere damage
in the parietal lobe and you lose half
your body but you don't notice and i
think the reason you don't notice is
because
the
the left has no choice but to impose its
axiomatic presumptions
when there's nothing indicating the lack
and there's no pathway forward to a new
representation i've seen people who i
had a cousin who got really ill and she
she was diabetic and she had a lot of
immunological problems and
she had to radically modify her whole
life
to deal with what she could and couldn't
eat and she didn't do a very good job of
it and my parents and other people
her relatives were often upset with her
not so much my parents specifically but
many people who knew her were hurt and
upset with her because they felt that
she was denying her illness but i
thought man if something happens to you
that's cataclysmic and it changes your
entire identity in an extraordinarily
complex manner it takes you it can take
you months to years to re-adapt three
months just to remap your tooth and then
the left will insist that the pre
theory is the only one that abides yeah
well first of all it doesn't happen the
other way around so you can have justice
yeah cataclysmic event like your right
arm is paralyzed and
you don't deny it at all in fact you're
appropriately upset about it so it is
something to do with the left
hemisphere's way of understanding things
and what is really fascinating is that
when something
is not there and there are these
descriptions of patients who simply
won't recognize the existence of half of
their body
and and
fail to dress it or shave it but they
also is pointed out by singer cannot
imagine that there ever was a left half
of that
reward that there ever will be again in
the future in other words once it's gone
from the left hemisphere's attention it
ceases to exist so it's not even not
there i know it's so it's not it's not
as though this
it's not as though this left hemisphere
tendency is simply
to deny something it simply doesn't
believe that it exists so right and when
you put that on the cultural situation
at the moment you can
it begins to cast some light on how
people who can't be that stupid and who
can't be that perverse nonetheless argue
that black is white you know
yeah yeah well i've been trying to think
i've tried to think about the
phenomenology of neglect a lot you know
because it's such it is such a weird
thing that people even lose the notion
that what's absent what is absent so
it's not even not there it it's it's a
category we don't even can't even
comprehend but imagine so you look
straight ahead and you move your hands
to the side like this and what happens
is in when your hands are in front of
your eyes they're pretty high resolution
and then when you move them this way
they get lower and lower resolution
and then they get black and white out
here although you can't tell that but
scientific investigations have shown
that and then about here
they just cease to exist
and so i'm kind of wondering if that
sense of neglect phenomenologically is
akin
to having
that which is in our visual field behind
us now moved three quarters of the way
around instead of halfway around i'm not
sure i'd say that
um okay okay i think
there's a distinction between not being
able to see something but knowing that
it's there and the right hemisphere
doesn't engage in this kind of denial at
all it's perfectly aware that you can't
see something or it you know but the
left hemisphere for the left hemisphere
if it isn't in the map as it were then
it doesn't exist it's not on the map so
it can't be real and yeah
this is that's deconstructionism in a in
a nutshell right it's this privileging
of epistemology it's image throughout
various movements in the history of
ideas in our lifetime that and is
getting more and more extreme so that
people's theory about what the world
should be like is now the only reality
and if things don't conform to it it's
because some terrible people have been
deliberately trying to frustrate it
right well so okay so do you do do you
have some sense
sociologically
why
this
has intensified as of late like is it a
necessary consequence of our
scientific and technological prowess and
the philosophy that's come along with
that and do you think technology is
accelerating this in some sense well i
think our success in technology has led
us to believe that we understand all
sorts of things that we probably
understand less well than at any other
time in human history
and we may know more technically about
them but we don't really understand
what's going on or what the meaning or
value or purpose of these
elements in the world
is or are
and that's i think that's part of it
the fact is that when you
begin to see the world as meaningless
and purely mechanistic
then you lose the sense of value and
it's extremely distressing so it causes
an epidemic of anxiety and depression
and that's something that
something we can we can see the evidence
of all around us and when people are
anxious and depressed like that they
must have certainties they cling to
false certainties and they'd rather
cling to a certainty that's clearly
wrong
then face the fact that they really
don't they're disorientated so anything
that comes along that you know becomes
the the the element and particularly
important is something that offers
control
yes because anxiety is i'm it's out of
control it's terrifying i've i feel
quote unsafe i mean how often do we hear
that these days yeah i mean ridiculously
enough but we do but the great thing
there is we have to get control back and
that leads towards
um in intolerance and effectively things
that can't be talked about and the
foundations as hannah aaron said as
simon vay said of totalitarianism
okay so imagine imagine
i'll take a bit of a detour here to
talking to sam harris and so harris is a
reductive rationalist and he believes in
algorithmic processing he doesn't
believe in free will and
one of the things that's happened that's
really interesting to harris and i'm
saying this with all due respect i
really like sam and he's really smart
and i think his his orientation is
fundamentally good but what's so
interesting to see what what's happened
to him practically is that he's really
abandoned his rational atheism in in a
phenomenological sense to pursue
meditation and he's developed this
meditation app which is his central
focus now and he's teaching people all
over the world to meditate and what i
see happening is that he's taking a
respite from the narrow confines of his
reductive materialism in the world of
the transcendent right hemisphere and
it's he wants to keep that
non-linguistic and that's sort of the
buddhist twist on that because if it was
propositionalized and transferred into
something like a comprehensible religion
then his intellect would just criticize
it out of existence but he finds respite
and sakura in these practices that i
think produce a right hemisphere
revelation of harmony and totality and
love and all of that and then you might
imagine that
absent that so absent that proper
relationship between the left and the
right
so the left
so you can't find respite from your
narrow preoccupations and your doubt in
a relationship with the right
you have to start to depend on
ideological certainty as a buffer
against the anxiety
because you're not properly having
you're not properly integrated in the
part of the contextual understanding
that would lead you to genuine meaning
and that's where
that immersement meaning is like an
antidote to anxiety absent that you have
to occupy a narrower and narrower
certainty to keep your to keep yourself
from well from panicking in some sense
well uh attention is so fragmented
nowadays because it's valuable and is
therefore being grabbed out by so many
um uh different
sources all day long
that we no longer able to pay the sort
of sustained
vigilant non-verbal non-judgmental
openness of attention which is the very
business of mindfulness to try and
nourish right
and i think that people are gravitating
to this because in it for the first time
they can begin to see
a world that makes sense because as i
say
everything depends on the attention if
your attention is is fragmented and it's
making presumptions about what you're
seeing that it's purely meaningless
purposeless and mechanistic then you are
trapped into something and i suppose
that what he is trying to do there is to
say this is a way in which we can open
that up and i i think that's that's
welcome i suppose
i always worry about people adopting
spiritual practices as it were for
utilitarian purposes um but sometimes
it's better that they they adopt them
and then see what comes of that and that
they don't adopt them at all
i think it's a mistake to you you know
for example um to think that the point
of um meditating is um to lower your
blood pressure and make your mind work
faster so that you can be a better
stockbroker and that that is really not
that is to misunderstand this process
that you're entering into and it's
typically to it's typically to um
to do what the left hemisphere always
does which is to um turn it into a
commodity
right right to instrumentalize it yes
you instrumentalize it exactly yes yes
yes yes well a lot of these uh
bureaucratic enterprises and ideological
enterprises are also characterized by
the instrumentalization of everything
and the problem with that in some sense
is that that instrumentalization which
would be a left hemisphere function is
extremely useful if you have a narrow
goal directed necessity in mind and you
need to undertake it efficiently and in
a short period of time but if the
question of well what's all this for in
the broader sense comes up then that
kind of interfering that kind of
attention interferes with the
apprehension that would allow you to
conceive of the broader context and i
think there's a couple of things that
are really key and importance in what
we've been discussing that that people
should perhaps contemplate in a deep
sense and one is your insistence which
dovetails i would say with my insistence
that there isn't in some sense anything
more important than trying to understand
the processes by which attention is
directed there's something absolute you
know the egyptian god horus that i
that everyone knows the falcon that was
horus that is that attentional capacity
that you described and they worshipped
that as the redemptive god himself like
the eye of horus horus was the god who
redeemed
the dead state and who fought off seth
and seth eventually turns into satan by
the way via the coptics but seth is
exactly that force that always threatens
the bureaucratic state it's the usurping
force and so the egyptians knew
in their mythos that
the attentive eye
the eye of the falcon right and that's
the bird's eye view was the antidote to
totalitarian
to the totalitarian proclivity and the
mesopotamians knew this too because
their god marduk who was the top god and
also the model for the proper emperor
had eyes all the way around his head and
say they knew that it wasn't intellect
that was the antidote to the
totalitarian state not this narrow left
hemisphere intellect let's say it was
the capacity for
attention that we seem to be focusing on
when discussing right hemisphere
function
there's there's a couple of ways in
which one can see the eye of horus and
one is in the benign way that you do and
the other is as the
sort of um
uh
somewhat predatory all-seeing eye
the disembodied eye
and one day right one day i want to
write about this because it's something
an enormous number of egyptian symbols
including the disembodied eye come up in
the artwork of patients with
schizophrenia who don't know anything
about egyptology oh and i would love to
talk about what one day
write a book about that well the
egyptian well good that's something else
we can talk about you know the egyptians
knew this too because they for them the
optimal pharaoh so the principle of
sovereignty wasn't the eye of horus
it was the eye of horus
having revitalized osiris who was the
spirit of the state and so horus gives
one of his eyes to osiris osiris is his
dead father so their union and and yeah
so so so that's a very complex thing
it is yeah
but how did we get onto the eye of
horrors i've forgotten oh while we were
talking we were talking about the
potential redemptive value of of attack
attention oh yes my goodness exactly yes
and the fight the fight of attention
against uh against intellectual arrogant
intellectual totalitarian presumption
yes
and i just want to sort of say something
very briefly about purpose that i uh
people may think oh dear um
he thinks that as it were there's a an
engineering god who sort of um
got it all
the deistic vision you know that god
wound up the universe and let it go or
can occasionally move into the clockwork
that's not what i mean at all i i mean
that there is some um purpose that is
transcendent
that is sacred
and is not deterministic which is a
really important point to make um anyway
i think the science points in that well
i think the science points in that
direction too ian so yes that's another
place where we can be really hard-headed
about this you know i talked to roger
penrose about this because penrose does
not believe that consciousness itself is
reducible to an algorithm or
computational and he believes that i
believe on grounds that from the physics
perspective are similar to the what
would you say they come from the same
conceptual universe as the ideas that
you're propounding in relationship to
the idea of consciousness at the
forefront of let's say the revelation of
possibility something like that so we
can nobody can come up at let's say and
criticize the these the ideas that we're
discussing you and i by saying well the
biology doesn't point in that direction
and neither does the physics it's like
no the biology points very strongly in
this direction and so does the physics i
mean this is it does i mean
the argument that um there is no
direction or no drive no purpose in
biology but it's all simply accidental
lives i think there must be a few people
left in the world who still believe that
but i think it's largely been
discredited completely
um
it's very obvious in fact that biology
is highly expressive of purpose but i
think even the inanimate
universe is as well and i adopt a rather
unusual position but perhaps we mustn't
go there because it will take us for a
long time to discuss but that the
inanimate and animate worlds are not
totally
distinct from one another obviously they
are distinct in the sense that they are
completely different and and have
different kinds of
qualities but they're not
ultimately divided they're not
ultimately separate there is a continuum
is the best way of putting it
um i'm going to talk to ian a bit more
um for the daily wire plus folks for
another half an hour or so about i would
say his intellectual biography and his
personal pathway
through the intellectual and
philosophical world to the point where
he's developed the ideas that we've been
talking about